Binary Trie (#3102)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-3102.md

---
eip: 3102
title: Binary trie structure
author: Guillaume Ballet (@gballet), Vitalik Buterin (@vbuterin)
status: Draft
discussions-to: https://ethresear.ch/t/binary-trie-format/7621
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2020-09-01
---

## Simple Summary

> A proposal for changing the format of the data-storage structure from hexary to binary, merging the account and storage tries, and using the faster BLAKE2. The goal is to make stateless proofs more wieldy.

Reviewer: Simple Summary should be akin to an email subject line, forum topic title, GitHub PR title, etc.  Also, goals should be part of the motivation.
```suggestion
Change storage structure from hexary to binary, merge the account and storage tries, and use BLAKE2.
```

## Abstract

> This proposal presents a binary structure and merkelization rule for the account and storage tries, which are merged into a single “state” trie. RLP and most of the MPT’s optimizations are dropped to simplify the design. Keccak256 is replaced with BLAKE2-256.

Reviewer: The Abstract should be a very terse human readable version of the specification.  Ideally, someone should be able to read the abstract and get a rough idea of what it would take to implement this specification.  Minutia and edge cases should be left out, but the core should be included.  In this case, this specification is pretty big so it will be hard to cut it down but the ideal abstract is 1 or two paragraphs in mostly plain English.

There is a push for making Ethereum easier to use in a stateless fashion. Binary tries make for smaller (~4x) proofs than hexary tries, making it the design of choice for a stateless-friendly Ethereum.

For that same reason, the account and storage tries are merged in order to have a single proof for all changes.

The MPT design is also rife with uncanny optimizations for size, that have a limited effect - at the cost of prohibitive complexity. For example, nesting for children whose RLP is less than 32 bytes saves an estimated 1MB of disk space. A paltry compared to the 300GB required by a fast sync at the time of this writing. These optimizations are a significant source of errors, and therefore a consensus-breaking risk.
The reliance on RLP has also been criticized for its complexity, while the overhead of a general-purpose encoding scheme isn’t warranted for the rigid structure of a Merkle trie.

The desire to switch the storage model from an hexary trie to a binary trie provides an opportunity to adopt a simpler trie architecture that pushes optimizations from the protocol level down to that of the client implementors.

## Specification

### Conventions

> As defined in the yellow paper, $\mathbb{B}$ is the set of all possible byte sequences, and $\mathbb{B}_{32}$ is the set of all byte sequences of length 32. Accordingly, $\mathbb{B}_{l}$ is the set of all byte sequences of length $l$. 

Reviewer: I don't believe any of the EIP rendering systems support latex.  I recommend using programmer style rather than mathematician style as that will make this specification readable in just about any rendering system (including plain text).

 * The root of the storage trie $A_s$ can be found at key $\texttt{H}(A_a)_{0..253} \space\texttt{++}\space 11_2$
     * The storage slot number $k \in \mathbb{B}_{32}$ can be found at key $\texttt{H}(A_a)_{0..253} \space\texttt{++}\space 11_2 \space\texttt{++}\space \texttt{H}(k)$;

After [EIP-2926](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2926) has been rolled out, $A_c$ will represent the root of the code merkelization tree. The key accessing code chunk $c$ is $\texttt{H}(A_a)_{0..253} \space\texttt{++}\space 10_2 \space\texttt{++}\space \texttt{U256}(c)$.

### Node merkelization rule

Leaves and nodes that have no prefix are hashed according to the rule below:

```
internal_hash = hash(left_child_hash || right_child_hash)
leaf_hash = hash(hash(key) || hash(leaf_value))
```

If a prefix is present, the length of the path from the root to the prefixed node is further concatenated with the output of the prefix-less rule, and hashed again:

```
internal_hash_with_prefix = hash(u256(path_length_u256 - 1) || internal_hash)
leaf_hash_with_prefix = hash(u256(path_length_u256 - 1) || leaf_hash)
```

## Rationale

> ### BLAKE2-256

Reviewer 2: What is BLAKE2-256? Is it BLAKE-256, BLAKE2s, or even BLAKE2b?

Author: right, it's blake2b. I'll fix it.

BLAKE2 offers better performance, which is key to compensate for the loss of performance associated to a ~4x increase in the number of nodes.

> BLAKE3 offers even better performance. No official golang release exists at the time of the writing of this document. This presents a security risk, and therefore BLAKE2 is considered instead.

Reviewer: Why is only golang mentioned here?  If the argument is that language X doesn't have a library for Y but does have a library for Z, then X should actually be a set of all of the major languages used in the ecosystem including Python, C#, Java, JavaScript, Rust, Go.  Is there a BLAKE2 library available for all of them?  Go should not be given special treatment as we are trying to get away from "Geth dominance" and encourage a wider adoption of a variety of different clients.

### Merging of the account and storage tries

The trend in clients is to store the keys and values in a "flat" database. Having the key of any storage slot prefixed with the address key of the account it belongs to helps grouping all of an account's data on disk, as well as simplifying the witness structure.

### Prefixes and extension nodes

An alternative proposal has been made, which provides optimal witnesses. The trade-off is that extension nodes must be removed.

```
node_hash = hash(left_child_hash || right_child_hash)
leaf_hash = hash(0 || leaf_value)
```

The removal of extension nodes induces 40x higher hashing costs (on the order of 25ms for a trie with only 1k leaves) and as a result they have been kept.

> An attempt to keep extension nodes for witness and not the merkelization rule can be found [here](https://notes.ethereum.org/m5VMkX8FRvi0Q_OOR7TF4A).

Reviewer: When possible, try not to link externally.  Can the contents of this document be included inline or as an asset in `../assets/eip-3102/`?

In order to remove the complexity associated with byte manipulation, only the bit-length of the extension is used to merkelize a node with a prefix.

Storing the length of the path from the root node instead of that from the parent node has the nice property that siblings need not be hashed when deleting a leaf.

![Sibling deletion diagram](../assets/eip-3102/sibling.svg)

_On the left, a trie with the prefix length, and on the right, a trie with the full path length. Each both have values `10000100` and `10000000`. Deleting `10000100` result in the same trie. In the case of the left trie, the sibling node has to be updated, while in the case of the right trie, it need not be._

### Value hashing

Except for the code, all values in the trie are less than 32 bytes. EIP-2926 introduces code chunks, with `CHUNK_SIZE = 32 bytes`. The hashing of the leaf's value could therefore be saved. The authors of the EIP are however considering a future increase of `CHUNK_SIZE`, making `hash(value)` the future-proof choice.

## Backwards Compatibility

A hard fork is required in order for blocks to have a trie root using a different structure.

## Test Cases

> This section is still incomplete and will be fleshed out as clients start implementing the support for binary tries.
> 
> An initial implementation has been made for Geth. Unit tests can be found [here](https://github.com/gballet/go-ethereum/blob/binary-trie-m5-full-path/trie/binary_test.go).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TBD
```
The EIP should be written toward its final state and not contain transient information.  If Test Cases aren't available yet that is totally fine, but it is better to just put TBD in rather than temporary filler material.  As mentioned elsewhere, external links should be avoided and an ideal test cases section would just have a list of test inputs and expected outputs that can easily be ported to any language/testing system.

## Implementation

 * As of [commit 0db87e187dc0bfb96046a47e3d6768c93a2e3331](https://github.com/gballet/multiproof-rs/commit/6d22b1aef9548581826b3c04b3e00d6cc709388c), [multiproof-rs](https://github.com/gballet/multiproof-rs) implements this merkelization rule in the `hash_m5()` function, found in file `src/binary_tree.rs`.
 * An implementation of this structure for go-ethereum is available [in this branch](https://github.com/gballet/go-ethereum/tree/binary-trie-m5).

> 

Reviewer: The implementation section is optional, and I general prefer that if it is included it has an inline reference implementation or something in `../assets/eip-3102/` rather than linking externally.  External links like this, especially to private repositories, tend to not stand the test of time very well.  Keep in mind that EIPs are meant to be pure technical specifications, and things like examples, tutorials, libraries, etc. should be handled elsewhere.

## Security Considerations

> Issues could arise when performing the transition. In particular, a heavy conversion process could incentivize clients to wait the transition out. This could lead to a lowered network security at the time of the transition. A transition process has been proposed with [EIP-2584](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-2584.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Issues could arise when performing the transition. In particular, a heavy conversion process could incentivize clients to wait the transition out. This could lead to a lowered network security at the time of the transition. A transition process has been proposed with [EIP-2584](./eip-2584.md).
```

> ## Acknowledgment
> 
> This EIP has benefited from the valuable input of @poemm, @BoltonBailey, @s1na, @ledgerwatch and @holiman.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
EIPs are public domain, which means attribution is not required and we want to avoid EIPs turning into a place where people give out props/kudos/etc.  Social media, blogs, discussion forums, personal/company websites, etc. are a much better place for such things than a technical specification.

---
eip: 3102
title: Binary trie structure
author: Guillaume Ballet (@gballet), Vitalik Buterin (@vbuterin)
status: Draft
discussions-to: https://ethresear.ch/t/binary-trie-format/7621
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2020-09-01

> requires: None
> replaces: None

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Just leave them out if there are no dependencies.  Otherwise the bot will complain (as it is).
